feat: add education content koala-3662 (#879)
canvas-medical/documentation: collections/_learn/overview.md

For example, an ActionButton in the patient charting menu, when launched, makes a GET call to a SimpleAPI endpoint that renders some custom HTML content in a sidebar. The [Vitals Visualizer Plugin](https://docs.canvasmedical.com/sdk/example-vitals_visualizer_plugin/) showcases a composition of handlers that allow you to display custom UIs in response to a user initiated event.

A single plugin can contain multiple handlers, and group handlers of similar functionality together. For example, [Patient Summary Chart Groups](https://docs.canvasmedical.com/sdk/example-patient_summary_chart_groups/) iterates on and organizes patient conditions and also medications.

These handlers allow you to build everything from small quality-of-life agentic automations (like [AI note titles](/sdk/example-ai_note_titles/)) to more complex integrations ([Syncing patients between systems](/sdk/example-patient_creation_platform_sync/)), or even full web applications ([Example Chart Application](/sdk/example-example_chart_app/)).

## Summary

In this overview, you learned about:

> - The two primary ways to interact with the Canvas EMR programmatically: The **FHIR API** for general interoperability and the **Canvas SD**K** for deep system customization.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The two primary ways to interact with the Canvas EMR programmatically: The **FHIR API** for general interoperability and the **Canvas SDK** for deep system customization.
```

> - The two primary ways to interact with the Canvas EMR programmatically: The **FHIR API** for general interoperability and the **Canvas SD**K** for deep system customization.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The two primary ways to interact with the Canvas EMR programmatically: The **FHIR API** for general interoperability and the **Canvas SDK** for deep system customization.
```

---
title: "Overview"
slug: "overview"
layout: education
hidden: false
---

# **Lesson 1: Overview**

## Extending the EMR: A Developer’s Guide to the Canvas SDK

### Introduction

Welcome to Canvas! The Canvas platform is a fully-featured, certified Electronic Medical Record (EMR) that provides robust tools for customization and extension. For developers looking to integrate with or build custom logic within the EMR, the platform offers two main pathways: the **FHIR API** and the **Canvas SDK**.

> While the FHIR API offers a standards-based **REST API** with 37 resources (21 of which are writable) for interoperability, the Canvas SDK enables developers to write custom **Python programs (plugins)** that execute synchronously within the EMR server container.

Reviewer 2: Agree, good summary, but to help keep it up to date we should compute the counts of supported FHIR resources. [I did this for the main page](https://github.com/canvas-medical/documentation/blob/main/pages/index.md?plain=1#L97-L123), you should be able to copy/paste it for use here.

If your goal is to deeply customize the EMR’s behavior, implement clinical decision support, enforce business rules, or automate charting, the SDK is your primary tool.

In this overview, we will explore the three core concepts developers need to master to build effective plugins: **Events**, **Data**, and **Effects**, and we'll look at the specific **Handler** types used to implement your logic.

### The Plugin Runner: Your Custom Code in the EMR

> The core of the SDK is the **plugin runner**, an open-source gRPC server that executes your Python code. Your logic is structured as a set of one or more **handlers**—classes that perform a single responsibility and listen for declared events.

Reviewer: it might be nice to use the term `effects` in here. something like `Your logic is structured as a set of one or more **handlers**-classes that listen for declared **events** and return one or more **effects**`

- **`CronTask`**: Designed for scheduled automation. You set the cron string in the `SCHEDULE` constant and implement the `execute` method.
- **`ActionButton`**: Allows you to customize the EMR user interface. You set the button label and location and implement the `handle` method. An optional `visible` method can be implemented to make the button appear only under certain conditions.
- **`SimpleAPI`**: For custom HTTP interactions. You implement an `authenticate` method and a method for each request path, annotated with the path and verb (e.g., GET, POST), resulting in a custom endpoint IN YOUR CANVAS INSTANCE…!
- **`Application`**: Used to embed custom user interfaces or launch modals within the EMR. You provide an icon and title, and implement the `on_open` method.

These handlers allow you to build everything from small quality-of-life automations (like [AI note titles](https://docs.canvasmedical.com/sdk/example-ai_note_titles/)) to complex integrations ([Syncing patients between systems](https://docs.canvasmedical.com/sdk/example-patient_creation_platform_sync/)).

### Summary

In this overview, you learned about:

> - The two primary ways to extend the Canvas EMR: the **FHIR API** for general interoperability and the **Canvas SDK** for deep system customization via Python plugins.

Reviewer: one thing that wasn't really covered in this section is that a single plugin can contain many different handlers/protocols. maybe something about how a single plugin can group handlers of similar functionality together.

---
title: "Overview"
slug: "overview"
layout: education
hidden: false
---

# **Lesson 1: Overview**

## Extending the EMR: A Developer’s Guide to the Canvas SDK

### Introduction

> Welcome to Canvas! The Canvas platform is a fully-featured, certified Electronic Medical Record (EMR) that provides robust tools for customization and extension. For developers looking to integrate with or build custom logic within the EMR, the platform offers two main pathways: the **FHIR API** and the **Canvas SDK**.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Welcome to Canvas! The Canvas platform is a fully-featured, ONC certified Electronic Medical Record (EMR) that provides robust tools for customization and extension. For developers looking to integrate with or build custom logic within the EMR, the platform offers two main pathways: the **FHIR API** and the **Canvas SDK**.
```

By responding to these events, developers can tailor the EMR's behavior to specific operational or clinical workflows.

### 2. Data: Read-Only Access via Django ORM

Within your plugin, you need access to the EMR data. The SDK provides this access through a set of **read-only database views** using the **Django ORM**.

The use of the Django ORM is a significant developer advantage because **Django ORM objects offer a robust opportunity to filter and parse a given data model and any of its defined relationships.** This allows developers to write powerful and concise queries to fetch exactly the patient records, appointments, or clinical data they need for their custom logic.

**Why Read-Only Database Views?**

This design choice is intentional to provide a **stable developer interface**. Canvas's internal database schemas may change over time, but the SDK view definitions can adapt accordingly. This shields your plugin code from breaking changes that would occur if you accessed tables directly.

> If you need access to data types that are not currently exposed, the platform encourages developers to request them.

Reviewer 2: We (Canvas) encourage them to, not the platform.

### 3. Effects: Persisting Changes and Controlling the UI

> Because your plugin code has read-only access to the EMR’s transactional database, any changes you want to make—such as persisting data or updating the user interface—must be returned to the EMR in the form of **Effects**.

Author: cool. we can go deeper into CQRS in the effects lesson

Your plugin is built around **Handlers**, which are the specific units of code you provide. They may listen for events by declaring them directly or by inheriting from a specific handler subclass.

Key Handler Types to Know:

- **`BaseHandler`**: The most fundamental type. You declare the events it listens for in the `RESPONDS_TO` constant and implement the `compute` method to return a list of effects.
- **`CronTask`**: Designed for scheduled automation. You set the cron string in the `SCHEDULE` constant and implement the `execute` method.
- **`ActionButton`**: Allows you to customize the EMR user interface. You set the button label and location and implement the `handle` method. An optional `visible` method can be implemented to make the button appear only under certain conditions.
- **`SimpleAPI`**: For custom HTTP interactions. You implement an `authenticate` method and a method for each request path, annotated with the path and verb (e.g., GET, POST), resulting in a custom endpoint IN YOUR CANVAS INSTANCE…!
- **`Application`**: Used to embed custom user interfaces or launch modals within the EMR. You provide an icon and title, and implement the `on_open` method.

> A single plugin can contain multiple handlers/protocols, and group handlers of similar functionality together. For example, an ActionButton in the patient charting menu, when launched, makes a GET call to a SimpleAPI endpoint that renders some custom HTML content in a sidebar. (See [Vitals Visualizer Plugin](https://docs.canvasmedical.com/sdk/example-vitals_visualizer_plugin/))

Reviewer 2: We should not use the word "protocol" unless we're talking able an actual clinical protocol.

Your example doesn't seem like an example of grouping handlers of similar functionality together, it looks like an example of handlers being composed.

I would also add more to the parenthetical. "(The Vitals Visualizer Plugin showcases this composition of handlers that allows you to display custom UIs in response to a user initiated event)"

These handlers allow you to build everything from small quality-of-life agentic automations (like [AI note titles](https://docs.canvasmedical.com/sdk/example-ai_note_titles/)) to complex integrations ([Syncing patients between systems](https://docs.canvasmedical.com/sdk/example-patient_creation_platform_sync/)).

### Summary

In this overview, you learned about:

- The two primary ways to extend the Canvas EMR: the **FHIR API** for general interoperability and the **Canvas SDK** for deep system customization via Python plugins.
- The SDK's **plugin runner**, an open-source gRPC server that executes your custom logic.
- The three foundational concepts for building plugins: **Events** (the trigger), **Data** (read-only access via Django ORM views), and **Effects** (typed payloads used to persist changes and control the UI).
- The specific **Handler** classes you can use to implement different kinds of logic, including `BaseHandler`, `CronTask`, and `SimpleAPI`.

> ---

Reviewer 2: I think these horizontal lines look bad

Author: noted. it's a placeholder.

## Next Steps

> [Next: let's set up your developer environment](/learn/setup)!

Author: This is just here until we can work https://canvasmedical.atlassian.net/browse/KOALA-3659
